docs/publications/paper.md, before:

---
title: 'Spreadsheet Energy System Model Generator (SESMG): A tool for the optimization of urban energy systems'
tags:
  - Python
  - Energy System Modeling
  - Urban Energy System
  - Optimization
  - Multi-Energy Systems
authors:
  - name: Christian Klemm
    corresponding: true # (This is how to denote the corresponding author)
    orcid: 0000-0003-0801-4178
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Gregor Becker
    orcid: 0000-0001-8803-6873
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Janik Budde
    orcid: 0000-0002-1617-5900
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jan Tockloth
    orcid: 0000-0003-2582-1043
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Peter Vennemann
    orcid: 0000-0002-0767-5014
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Energy, Building Services and Environmental Engineering, Münster University of Applied Sciences, Germany
   index: 1
 - name: Department of Energy and Environmental Management, Europa-Universität Flensburg, Germany 
   index: 2
date: 31 March 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

...

# Statement of need
Due to volatile renewable energy sources, the use of different energy storage systems, sector coupling, the growing importance of new sectors such as e-mobility and hydrogen usage [@Klemm.2023], as well as the increasing relevance of multiple planning objectives, it is becoming increasingly difficult to optimally design urban energy systems [@QUELLE]. In this context, urban energy systems are defined as “the combined process of acquiring and using energy in a given spatial entity with a high density and differentiation of residents, buildings, commercial sectors, infrastructure, and energy sectors (e.g., heat, electricity, fuels). They are also called mixed-used multi-energy systems” [@Klemm.Indicators]. Traditionally, such systems are designed by simulating and comparing a very few predefined energy supply scenarios. Mathematical optimization of the systems is usually not performed [@QUELLE]. In addition, individual buildings, consumption sectors, or energy sectors are rarely planned and designed holistically, but rather separately from each other [@Lukszo.2018]. Finally, planning processes are often driven only by financial interests, instead of considering additional planning objectives, such as minimizing greenhouse gas emissions or reducing final energy demands. To fully exploit all synergies and avoid conflicting interests of increasingly entangled energy systems [@Pfenninger.2014], it is necessary to carry out holistic planning [@Lukszo.2018]. Therefore, all energy sectors, planning objectives and an entire spatial entity should be considered within a holistic analysis [@QUELLE]. Thereby, not only certain, but all theoretically possible supply scenarios should be compared by using optimization algorithms [@QUELLE], to ensure that those scenarios are identified that allow the minimization of the planning objectives by a given ratio [@QUELLE].

The Spreadsheet Energy System Model Generator (SESMG) meets all these requirements as modeling tool for urban energy systems, by considering the multi-energy system (MES) approach [@Mancarella.2016], giving the opportunity of high resolution spatial modeling [.......], and by carrying out multi-objective optimization by using the epsilon-constraint-method [@QUELLE].

...


# Acknowledgements

...

# References

Commit message:

docs(paper.md): added funding information within acknowledgments section

docs/publications/paper.md, after:

---
title: 'Spreadsheet Energy System Model Generator (SESMG): A tool for the optimization of urban energy systems'
tags:
  - Python
  - Energy System Modeling
  - Urban Energy System
  - Optimization
  - Multi-Energy Systems
authors:
  - name: Christian Klemm
    corresponding: true # (This is how to denote the corresponding author)
    orcid: 0000-0003-0801-4178
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Gregor Becker
    orcid: 0000-0001-8803-6873
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Janik Budde
    orcid: 0000-0002-1617-5900
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jan Tockloth
    orcid: 0000-0003-2582-1043
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Peter Vennemann
    orcid: 0000-0002-0767-5014
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Energy, Building Services and Environmental Engineering, Münster University of Applied Sciences, Germany
   index: 1
 - name: Department of Energy and Environmental Management, Europa-Universität Flensburg, Germany 
   index: 2
date: 31 March 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

...

# Statement of need
Due to volatile renewable energy sources, the use of different energy storage systems, sector coupling, the growing importance of new sectors such as e-mobility and hydrogen usage [@Klemm.2023], as well as the increasing relevance of multiple planning objectives, it is becoming increasingly difficult to optimally design urban energy systems [@QUELLE]. In this context, urban energy systems are defined as “the combined process of acquiring and using energy in a given spatial entity with a high density and differentiation of residents, buildings, commercial sectors, infrastructure, and energy sectors (e.g., heat, electricity, fuels). They are also called mixed-used multi-energy systems” [@Klemm.Indicators]. Traditionally, such systems are designed by simulating and comparing a very few predefined energy supply scenarios. Mathematical optimization of the systems is usually not performed [@QUELLE]. In addition, individual buildings, consumption sectors, or energy sectors are rarely planned and designed holistically, but rather separately from each other [@Lukszo.2018]. Finally, planning processes are often driven only by financial interests, instead of considering additional planning objectives, such as minimizing greenhouse gas emissions or reducing final energy demands. To fully exploit all synergies and avoid conflicting interests of increasingly entangled energy systems [@Pfenninger.2014], it is necessary to carry out holistic planning [@Lukszo.2018]. Therefore, all energy sectors, planning objectives and an entire spatial entity should be considered within a holistic analysis [@QUELLE]. Thereby, not only certain, but all theoretically possible supply scenarios should be compared by using optimization algorithms [@QUELLE], to ensure that those scenarios are identified that allow the minimization of the planning objectives by a given ratio [@QUELLE].

The Spreadsheet Energy System Model Generator (SESMG) meets all these requirements as modeling tool for urban energy systems, by considering the multi-energy system (MES) approach [@Mancarella.2016], giving the opportunity of high resolution spatial modeling [.......], and by carrying out multi-objective optimization by using the epsilon-constraint-method [@QUELLE].

...


# Acknowledgements
This research has been conducted within the R2Q project, funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), grant number 033W102A.

# References
