docs/02.02.04_results.rst, before:

Results
=======

.. warning::

	If a time series preparation algorithm was applied for the (main-)model, not every time-step of the model was modeled. This must be considered when analysing *energy amounts*. Simplifying, it can be assumed that the modeled amount of energy multiplied by the variable cost factor (see methods section) corresponds to the actual  amount of energy over the entire period. Changes in the cost structure, on the other hand, are automatically taken into account.

.. _`interactive results`:

Interactive Results
-------------------

You will be automatically directed to this page after the optimization process
(1) or you may want to analyze existing results (2) again.

1. Result processing after optimization process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The results differ depending on whether you used only one optimization
criterion (a) or whether you did a multi-criteria optimization (b).

1a. Single-criteria optimization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In a single-criteria optimization, the costs, emissions, and energy demands
of the neighborhood are displayed. In addition, you can view the system graph
and all building-specific load profiles via the interactive results.

.. figure:: ../docs/images/manual/GUI/gui_result.png
   :width: 50 %
   :alt: GUI
   :align: center

1b. Multi-criteria optimization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In multi-criteria optimization, several scenarios are calculated. For more information take a look at the method: `Modeling Method <https://spreadsheet-energy-system-model-generator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/01.02.00_multi_criteria_optimization.html>`_. For each scenario, the results described for a single-criteria optimization can be displayed by selecting the reduction of the scenario (see (1) figure below). In addition, a Pareto diagram and energy amount diagrams are displayed (see (2) figure below).

.. figure:: ../docs/images/manual/GUI/gui_result_pareto.png
   :width: 50 %
   :alt: GUI
   :align: center

2. Result processing of existing results
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The difference is that you need to select a folder that you want to analyze.


Results as Spreadsheets and Log-Files
-------------------------------------

The results of the modeling are stored in the "results" folder in two formats:
- as summarizing log files, under
- as detailed xlsx-files.

The log-file gives an overview of which components are created and which of the
investment options should be implemented.
In addition, it is indicated which costs for the supply of the energy system are
incurred in the optimized case.
For each implemented bus, an xlsx-file is created in which incoming and outgoing
energy flows are specified for each time step of the model are.

Commit message:

docu(results): introduce new result folder structure

docs/02.02.04_results.rst, after:

Results
=======

.. warning::

	If a time series preparation algorithm was applied for the (main-)model, not every time-step of the model was modeled. This must be considered when analysing *energy amounts*. Simplifying, it can be assumed that the modeled amount of energy multiplied by the variable cost factor (see methods section) corresponds to the actual  amount of energy over the entire period. Changes in the cost structure, on the other hand, are automatically taken into account.

.. _`interactive results`:

Interactive Results
-------------------

You will be automatically directed to this page after the optimization process
(1) or you may want to analyze existing results (2) again.

1. Result processing after optimization process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The results differ depending on whether you used only one optimization
criterion (a) or whether you did a multi-criteria optimization (b).

1a. Single-criteria optimization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In a single-criteria optimization, the costs, emissions, and energy demands
of the neighborhood are displayed. In addition, you can view the system graph
and all building-specific load profiles via the interactive results.

.. figure:: ../docs/images/manual/GUI/gui_result.png
   :width: 50 %
   :alt: GUI
   :align: center

1b. Multi-criteria optimization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In multi-criteria optimization, several scenarios are calculated. For more information take a look at the method: `Modeling Method <https://spreadsheet-energy-system-model-generator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/01.02.00_multi_criteria_optimization.html>`_. For each scenario, the results described for a single-criteria optimization can be displayed by selecting the reduction of the scenario (see (1) figure below). In addition, a Pareto diagram and energy amount diagrams are displayed (see (2) figure below).

.. figure:: ../docs/images/manual/GUI/gui_result_pareto.png
   :width: 50 %
   :alt: GUI
   :align: center

2. Result processing of existing results
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The difference is that you need to select a folder that you want to analyze.


Results as Spreadsheets and Log-Files
-------------------------------------

The results of the modeling are stored in the SESMG result folder which is 
places by dafault in die /users/documents/SESMG/result direcotory. The directory
is created be the SESMG application. You can change the direcotry when you are 
using the advanced installation by following the `note information in the installation
description <https://spreadsheet-energy-system-model-generator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/02.01.00_installation.html#advanced-installation>`_.

The results are saved in two formats:
- as summarizing log files
- as detailed xlsx-files.

The log-file gives an overview of which components are created and which of the
investment options should be implemented.
In addition, it is indicated which costs for the supply of the energy system are
incurred in the optimized case.
For each implemented bus, an xlsx-file is created in which incoming and outgoing
energy flows are specified for each time step of the model are.
