Interface
*************

Main Page
===========

Input
------


xxxx
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

xxxx
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Model Simplification
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Time Series Preparation
''''''''''''''''''''''

Depending on which of the time series preparation algorithms described in the methods section is used, the following specifications must be made:

* **Algorithm**: Indication of the simplification algorithm to be applied.

* **Index**: Algorithm specific configuration.

* **Criterion**: Criterion according to which cluster algorithms are applied.

* **Period**: Time periods which are clustered together (weeks, days, hours)

* **Season**: Time periods within which clustering takes place (year, seasons, months)

The following algorithms are applicable and must be specified with the following additional information. A detailed description of the algorithms can be found in the methods section.

.. csv-table::
	:file: ../csv/timeseries_preparation.csv
	:header-rows: 1

Pre-Modeling
''''''''''''''''''''''
For the pre-modeling as described in the methods section, the following specifications must be made:

* **Active**: Must be checked, if pre-modeling should be carried out.

* **Time series preparation parameters**: Timeseries-preparation specifications for the *pre-model* must be given.

* **Investment Boundaries**: Must be checked, if "tightening of technical boundaries" should be carried out.

* **Investment Boundary Factor**: Factor to which the investment 



Short Results
--------------

Results
===========



References
===========
[1] Klemm, C.; Wiese, F. and Vennemann P.  *Model-based run-time and memory reduction for a mixed-use multi-energy system model with high spatial resolution*. Applied Energy (2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.120574

[2] Green, R.; Staffell, I and Vasilakos, N. *Divide and Conquer? k-Means Clustering of Demand Data Allows Rapid and Accurate Simulations of the British Electricity System.* IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 61.2 (2014): 251-260.
