Additional Features
*********

There are additional features available that can be used with the SESMG, but are currently not represented in the GUI.

SESMG-Data
===========
The program SESMG-Data automizes the Data-Processing for Energy System Models. The basis for this restructuring is a database that contains multiple .csv files and can 
be used automatically to create different outputs that are later needed in the automated modeling process of urban energy systems.
The goal of the program is to implement a comprehensive database that minimizes the risk of errors by providing a centralized repository of information.
Further information about installation and usage can be found in the README  `here <https://github.com/SESMG/SESMG-Data/blob/Merged_program/README.md>`_. 

SESMG-LCA
===========

Description
-----------

The program automates an additional Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) for simulated and optimized energy systems. For users unfamiliar with LCA, it is essential to understand that an LCA involves two main components: inventory analysis and impact assessment. Inventory analysis deals with the compilation and quantification of inputs and outputs for a product or system throughout its life cycle. Impact assessment, on the other hand, evaluates the potential environmental impacts associated with those inputs and outputs. Therefore, the LCA program makes it possible to assess flows of technologies and energy systems (inventory results) as well as environmental impacts for different impact categories (e.g., climate change, human toxicity, freshwater eutrophication, metal depletion, ...).

The LCA program is currently implemented in a specific branch of the SESMG, available `here <https://github.com/SESMG/SESMG/releases/tag/v1.0.1rc2>`_. To use the feature, the user needs an installed version of the openLCA 2.0 software and an implemented database within the software. Technologies in the model definition need to be assigned to an LCA dataset in the software by adding a UUID (Universally Unique Identifier) key in the column "lca_uuid". After setting up the server in the openLCA application, users can select the option for additional LCA results in the GUI for simulation or Pareto runs.

Results of the LCA application include the inventory results and the impact assessment results for the entire energy system. Moreover, results for the impact categories are differentiated by technologies, saved in the results folder for each run. Additionally, the environmental impacts are summarized for the different points of the Pareto front and also visualized in the GUI.

Reference Case 
---------------
The functionality of the tool can be checked, even without an openLCA application, by assessing the results of an exemplary reference case. Therefore, the released program also contains the needed files.

- model_definition_reference_case: An example model definition for assigning UUID keys in the free database ProBas+.
- results_reference_case: The folder contains all results (SESMG results and LCA calculations) for a Pareto run with the model definition (cost-optimized scenario, three Pareto points, emission-optimized scenario). To visualize those results, the user can:

1. Manually create a "SESMG/results" folder in the local document directory.
2. Manually copy the results_reference_case folder into the "results" folder.
3. See the visualization of the environmental impacts by selecting this folder in the "Result Processing" of the GUI.


Further information about installation and usage can be found in the thesis 'Koert F., Coupling of Energy System Models with Life Cycle Assessment (2024), bachelor thesis'. The thesis serves as a comprehensive guide, providing background information and ensuring that even those unfamiliar with LCA concepts can comprehend the implementation and utilization of the openLCA 2.0 software for environmental impact assessments in energy system modeling.
