Publications
************

The SESMG is/was used within the following publications, theses and projects. 

Your publication/thesis/project is missing? Contact us!

Peer Review Papers
------------------
- Klemm, Christian; Vennemann, Peter & Wiese, Frauke (2024): "**Potential-risk and no-regret options for urban energy system design — A sensitivity analysis**", *Sustainable Cities and Society*, 102, 105189, `https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2024.105189 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2024.105189>`_. 

- Klemm, Christian; Wiese, Frauke & Vennemann, Peter (2023): "**Model-based run-time and memory reduction for a mixed-use multi-energy system model with high spatial resolution**", *Applied Energy*, 334, 120574, `https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.120574 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.120574>`_.

- Becker, Gregor; Klemm, Christian & Vennemann, Peter (2022): "**Open Source District Heating Modeling Tools—A Comparative Study**", *Energies*, 15(21), 8277, `https://doi.org/10.3390/en15218277 <https://doi.org/10.3390/en15218277>`_.

- Quest, Gemina; Arendt, Rosalie; Klemm, Christian; Bach, Vanessa; Budde, Janik; Vennemann, Peter & Finkbeiner, Matthias (2022): "**Integrated Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of Power and Heat Supply for a Neighborhood: A Case Study of Herne, Germany**", *Energies*, 15(16), 5900, `https://doi.org/10.3390/en15165900 <https://doi.org/10.3390/en15165900>`_.

- Klemm, Christian & Wiese, Frauke (2022): "**Indicators for the optimization of sustainable urban energy systems based on energy system modeling**", *Energy, Sustainability and Society*, 12(1), 1-20, `https://doi.org/10.1186/s13705-021-00323-3 <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13705-021-00323-3>`_.

- Klemm, Christian & Vennemann, Peter (2021): "**Modeling and optimization of multi-energy systems in mixed-use districts: A review of existing methods and approaches**". *Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews*, 135, 110206, `https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110206 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110206>`_.

Conference Proceedings
----------------------
- Budde, Janik; Klemm, Christian; Tockloth, Jan N.; Becker, Gregor & Vennemann, Peter (2023): "**Automatisierte Modellierung und Optimierung urbaner Energiesysteme**", *6. Regenerative Energietechnik Konferenz in Nordhausen 09. - 10. Februar 2023*, `available here (Page 150-159) <https://www.hs-nordhausen.de/fileadmin/Dateien/Forschung/2021/Tagungsband_RETCon_2023_Web.pdf>`_.

- Klemm, Christian & Vennemann, Peter (2021): "**Modellierung und Optimierung urbaner Energiesysteme im Projekt R2Q**", *4. Regenerative Energietechnik Konferenz in Nordhausen 18. - 19. Februar 2021*, `available here (Page 177-188) <https://www.hs-nordhausen.de/fileadmin/daten/fb_ing/inret/PDFs/tagungsband_retcon21_web_aa3__1_.pdf>`_.

Theses
------
- Niederhöfer, Daniel (2024): "**Optimierung von Energiesystemmodellen mittels Monte-Carlo-Simulation**" (Master Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences.  `Mail <mailto:daniel@niederhoefer-nw.de>`_

- Klemm, Christian (2023): "**Optimization of Sustainable Urban Energy Systems: Model Development and Application**" (PhD Thesis), Europa-Universität Flensburg. `Available here <https://www.zhb-flensburg.de/?id=55512>`_

- Budde, Janik (2022): "**Leitfaden zur Modellierung von Energiesystemen**" (Master Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences.  `Mail <mailto:janik.budde\@fh-muenster.de>`_

- Petereit, Vincent (2022): "**Wirtschaftlichkeitsanalyse der Wasserstoffnutzung in Quartieren**" (Bachelor Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences. `Mail <mailto:vincent.petereit@fh-muenster.de>`_

- Brüggemann, Vincent (2022): "**Energiesystemmodellierung des Lämmerhofs Mannhagen**" (Bachelor Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences. `Mail <mailto:vb011388@fh-muenster.de>`_

- Budde, Janik (2022): "**Residential load profile tools - A review and comparison of applied tools**" (Project Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences.  `Mail <mailto:janik.budde\@fh-muenster.de>`_

- Becker, Gregor (2022): "**Bereitstellung von Open Source Software in der Energiewirtschaft - Ein Leitfaden**" (Bachelor Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences.  `Mail <mailto:gregor.becker\@fh-muenster.de>`_

- Kerkeling, Pascal (2021): "**Energetische Optimierung eines kleinen gemischten Quartiers**" (Bachelor Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences.

- Sivabalasingam, Piriyanha (2021): "**Fortschreibung des Energiekonzeptes für ein Quartier mit Hilfe des Open Energy Modelling Frameworks**" (Master Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences.

- Budde, Janik (2020): "**Wärmepumpen in Stadtquartieren - Untersuchung anhand eines Quartiers in Herne**" (Bachelor Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences.  `Mail <mailto:janik.budde\@fh-muenster.de>`_

- Klemm, Christian (2020): "**Modelling and Optimization of Multi-Energy Systems in Mixed-Use Districts: An Exemplary Application**" (Master Thesis), Münster University of Applied Sciences. `Mail <mailto:christian.klemm\@fh-muenster.de>`_

Posters
-------------
- Tockloth, Jan N.; Klemm, Christian; Becker, Gregor; Blankenstein, Benjamin & Vennemann, Peter (2024): "**Spreadsheet Energy System Model Generator (SESMG)**", *16. Steinfurter Bioenergiefachtagung*, `https://doi.org/10.25974/fhms-17820 <https://doi.org/10.25974/fhms-17820>`_.  

Presentations
-------------
- Budde, Janik (2022): "**Spreadsheet Energy System Model Generator, SESMG**" (J. Budde), oemof user meeting (Flensburg, 18 – 20 MAY 2022), `Available here <https://oemof.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/2022-05-18_sesmg_janik_budde.pdf>`_.

- Becker, Gregor (2022): "**district heating modeling tools**" (G. Becker), oemof user meeting (Flensburg, 18 – 20 MAY 2022), `Available here <https://oemof.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/2022-05-18_Vortrag_Flensburg_Gregor_Becker.pdf>`_.

- Klemm, Christian (2022): "**Model-Based Run-Time and Memory Usage Optimization**", oemof user meeting (Flensburg, 18 – 20 MAY 2022), `Available here <https://oemof.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/2022-05-09_ModelBasedRuntimeOptimization.pdf>`_.

Energy system structure and parameters
--------------------------------------

- Klemm, Christian; Budde, Janik; Becker, Gregor; Tockloth, Jan N. & Vennemann, Peter (02/2023): "**Energy system model structure and parameters - Structure of Urban Energy System Models**", `https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6974401 <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6974401>`_.

- Klemm, Christian; Budde, Janik; Becker, Gregor; Tockloth, Jan N. & Vennemann, Peter (02/2023): "**Energy system model structure and parameters - Energy system modeling for a medium sized neighborhood**", `https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7360806 <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7360806>`_.

Projects
--------

- `RessourcenPlan im Quartier (R2Q) <http://fh-muenster.de/r2q>`_, FH Münster (2019 - 2022)

